one of the functions DNA has to perform
is replicating itself there is a lot of
replicating and reproduction going on in
the living world plants and animals
creating offspring their cells dividing
and unicellular protists and bacteria
dividing to each and every cell in every
organism has to have a copy or copies of
the DNA unique to its particular species
while it's important for DNA to
replicate accurately so that when cells
divide each receives exactly the same
genetic information as the other it is
just as important in terms of creating
the Earth's incredible living diversity
that an error or mutation occur
occasionally and that these mutations
can be transmitted to future generations
which is just what happens when a
mutation occurs in the DNA of a sex cell
the diversity of life here on earth is
largely a result of mutations that have
occurred in strands of DNA over the last
3 billion years another requirement of
DNA as a genetic material is that it be
able to store the information that
determines the characteristics of
organisms and the cells of which they
are made up on the surface this sounds
like an easy and obvious goal but there
are animals like certain species of
turtles that can live hundreds of years
and plants like redwoods that can live
thousands that is a long time to store
information in a potentially volatile
chemical environment if the cells in an
organism started losing parts of their
biochemical memories on a mass scale and
forgetting which critical cellular
functions to carry out it wouldn't be
long until the organism died as a result
of this cellular memory loss
finally DNA or any other potential
genetic material has to be able to use
the information at stores to direct the
synthesis of the structural proteins and
enzymes necessary for the operation of
the organism and its cells structural
proteins define and maintain the shape
of a cell or organism while enzymes are
large proteins that are critical to
carrying out all the various chemical
reactions essential to life the elegant
simplicity of DNA is at the heart of its
performance of its varied tasks as the
molecule of heredity each sequence of
bases spells out in a sort of biological
Morse code a unique set of genetic
instructions in a length of DNA only 10
nucleotide pairs long the four bases can
exist in over a million different
combinations as the average chromosome
of higher organisms is billions of
nucleotides or base pairs long we can
see that the information storage
potential of a strand of DNA is
tremendous but the huge number of base
pairs in the DNA of any given chromosome
would also appear to make the potential
for replication errors tremendously high